source/user/atom.rst, before:

AtoM - Access to Memory
=======================

`AtoM <https://www.accesstomemory.org/en/>`_ stands for Access to Memory. It is a web-based, open source application for standards-based archival description and access in a multilingual, multi-repository environment. This software was chosen because it adheres to international standards
and as a user friendly tool to produce archival descriptions.

In AtoM you can search for archival descriptions and 


Starting your search
---------------------

To start with a simple search like :menuselection:`manuscript`, enter your search terms in the search field. You can browse the results by the proposed list
(:menuselection:`Archival descriptions`, :menuselection:`Archival institutions`, :menuselection:`Subjects` and :menuselection:`Places`) or you narrow your search by facets. You will get a list of records and
record creators that match your search criteria. These search results also show which archival institutions hold the proper records. 

The lists provided show all records from all archives, according to CENDARIs priority to provide transnational access and multilingual content.
Narrow down your search results by using the facets provided on the left side. Choose from the proposed level of description (collections,
fonds, etc.); archival institutions with relevant holdings; creators (if it differs from archival institutions); place (choose by country); and by
subject (however, not all archival descriptions contain subject access points). Choose keywords carefully, and spell them correctly. When
you're deciding what keywords to put in the search field, try to choose words that are likely to appear on the record you're looking for.

You can narrow down search results for complex searches by using the **Advanced Search** page. You will reach it by
clicking on the search field or you go directly to the `Advanced Search page <https://archives.cendari.dariah.eu/index.php/search/advanced>`_.
Enter your search terms in the field :menuselection:`Search`. Narrow it down by using the dropdown menu to the right of the :menuselection:`Any field` button, choosing the
fields that should be searched (:menuselection:`title`, :menuselection:`reference code`, etc.). You can always add new criteria and combine them with logical connectives
(:menuselection:`or`, :menuselection:`and`, :menuselection:`not`).
You can filter your search results to find exactly what you are searching. Search filters on the left side of the Advanced search page will help
you to narrow down your search. Use such search filters as :menuselection:`repository`, :menuselection:`level of description` and etc.
If you are searching for sources on a certain topic, please bear in mind that the archival holdings described in AtoM cannot be seen as being
exhaustive, even if there are several dozen entries available for an archive. Archival descriptions have been produced according to the needs
of the topical Archival Research Guides and not with the aim to provide a comprehensive overview of all sources available in an archive.
Please, generally search independently from the language within the collections. If you are looking for results in certain language, type
keywords in this language (and in the appropriate script, f.ex. cyrillic) into the search box.

Disclaimer
------------

**Archival institutions** have been chosen for description according to the following criteria, according to CENDARIs case studies:

**World War I**

* to have all countries which have participated in the First World War covered
* to give special attention to East European and South East European countries and to describe so-called :menuselection:`hidden archives` which did not dispose of a digital representation so far
* to describe archival institutions with significant holdings with priority to central national archives, national military archives, national war museums
* archives with a wide scope of digitized finding aids

**Medieval Culture**

* to cover most Western countries, including USA and Australia
* to give special attention to East European and South East European countries
* to cover collections of interest for the scientific community according to their relevance in the academic bibliography
* to cover archival institutions with an advanced digitization level

**Descriptions of archival holdings:**
Please bear in mind that the archival holdings described in the CENDARI Archival Directory cannot be seen as being exhaustive, even if
there are several dozen entries available for an archive. Archival descriptions have been produced according to the needs of the topical
Archival Research Guides and not with the aim to provide a comprehensive overview of all sources available in an archive. The selection on
sources depends on the research question and therefore exhaustive descriptions of archival sources can never be reached.
Since descriptions of archival holdings can be added by users registered as contributors, and since they can be made publicly available by
users registered as editors, the Archival Directory can be seen as work in progress, never complete, and depending on the contribution of
users.

Frequently Asked Questions
----------------------------
**Are users allowed to add descriptions and what kind of descriptions are users being allowed to add?**

Users which are not logged in (reseachers) have :menuselection:`view-only` access to the CENDARI Archival Directory. Users are allowed to add archival
descriptions once they have received a DARIAH-account, are authenticated and have been granted contributor's rights, i.e. to read, create,
edit archival descriptions. Users with contributor's rights are not allowed to delete anything or to create archival institutions. Archival
descriptions can be added according to the needs of these users while observing the standards of the International Council on Archives. If
users want to have their archival descriptions being published and thus freely accessible for everybody, they should ask a user with editor
rights (usually their mentor) to check for the quality of the descriptions and afterwards change the status of the archival description from :menuselection:`draft`
to :menuselection:`published`. If users want archival institutions to be created, they should ask their mentor.

**What kind of agreements does CENDARI have with Archives and Libraries regarding the sharing of records?**

CENDARI does not have any specific agreements with Cultural Heritage Institutions. The Archival Directory AtoM will be open for Cultural
Heritage Institutions a	s well as for users to add descriptions according to their needs while observing the standards of the International
Council on Archives. If users want to publish archival descriptions and the content of finding aids within CENDARIs Archival Directory, they
should first talk to the archives whether or not they are allowed to do so.

**Will there be any translating of the institutional and archival descriptions be done?**

Unfortunately, no translations will be provided. Users are kindly requested to generally search independently from the language within the
collections. If you are looking for results in certain language, type keywords in this language (and in the appropriate script, f.ex. cyrillic) into
the search box.

**Will there be a browse by period function?**

Currently, it is foreseen to provide a browse by period function; it will be enabled only later. The reason why it is not yet there is simply that
the majority of archival holdings described have been produced in the same period, i.e. 1914-1918.

**Why do labels provided in the Subjects and Places categories not correspond to all the archival holdings available?**

All the entries have been produced manually. Therefore it depended on the decision of the describing person to add subjects and places
labels where she or he decided this to be appropriate. Therefore, the categories :menuselection:`Subjects` and :menuselection:`Places` correspond not to archival
description, only to a part of the descriptions produced by the MM teams and WW1 historians. In many cases these categories are not filled
at all. If users think these descriptions would be helpful, they can fill in these fields by themselves, where appropriate. This can be done by
entering an archival description after having logged in, click on :menuselection:`edit` at the foot of the page, click on :menuselection:`Access points`, start writing the
appropriate Subject or Place in the field given (note: you have to wait for some one or two seconds after having started typing since the
subjects and places already available in the system show up), and after having chosen or typed manually the appropriate subject or place
click on :menuselection:`Save` at the foot of the page.

**Why is there no comprehensive search tree in a hierarchical order?**

Hierarchised searches need pre-fixed taxonomies, on which the possible users of the Archival Directory should have agreed upon. In a
system like the one provided over here, such a pre-fixed taxonomy cannot be foreseen. Instead, CENDARI chose a more open approach
where users are free to choose their subjects and places according to their needs without having them pre-ordered in a hierarchical tree.
Users can even add subjects and places which have not yet added to the Archival Directory (compare here the FAQ "Why do labels provided
in the Subjects and Places categories ..." on how to do this).

**Why is there no hierarchy in the archival descriptions according to the level of fonds, subfonds, items etc.?**

The software of the Archival Directory does not allow to link fonds, collections, items etc. to each other if they are being produced separately,
i.e. by several contributors. That is why to arrange a comprehensive search tree in a hierarchical order is problematic.

Commit message:

change atom -> archival directory (this fixes CINFRA-29)

source/user/atom.rst, after:

CENDARI Archival Directory
===========================

The `CENDARI Archival directory <https://archives.cendari.dariah.eu/>`_ is implemented through `AtoM <https://www.accesstomemory.org/en/>`_, which stands for Access to Memory. 
It is a web-based, open source application for standards-based archival description and access in a multilingual, multi-repository environment. 
This software was chosen because it adheres to international standards and as a user friendly tool to produce archival descriptions.



Starting your search
---------------------

To start with a simple search like :menuselection:`manuscript`, enter your search terms in the search field. You can browse the results by the proposed list
(:menuselection:`Archival descriptions`, :menuselection:`Archival institutions`, :menuselection:`Subjects` and :menuselection:`Places`) or you narrow your search by facets. You will get a list of records and
record creators that match your search criteria. These search results also show which archival institutions hold the proper records. 

The lists provided show all records from all archives, according to CENDARIs priority to provide transnational access and multilingual content.
Narrow down your search results by using the facets provided on the left side. Choose from the proposed level of description (collections,
fonds, etc.); archival institutions with relevant holdings; creators (if it differs from archival institutions); place (choose by country); and by
subject (however, not all archival descriptions contain subject access points). Choose keywords carefully, and spell them correctly. When
you're deciding what keywords to put in the search field, try to choose words that are likely to appear on the record you're looking for.

You can narrow down search results for complex searches by using the **Advanced Search** page. You will reach it by
clicking on the search field or you go directly to the `Advanced Search page <https://archives.cendari.dariah.eu/index.php/search/advanced>`_.
Enter your search terms in the field :menuselection:`Search`. Narrow it down by using the dropdown menu to the right of the :menuselection:`Any field` button, choosing the
fields that should be searched (:menuselection:`title`, :menuselection:`reference code`, etc.). You can always add new criteria and combine them with logical connectives
(:menuselection:`or`, :menuselection:`and`, :menuselection:`not`).
You can filter your search results to find exactly what you are searching. Search filters on the left side of the Advanced search page will help
you to narrow down your search. Use such search filters as :menuselection:`repository`, :menuselection:`level of description` and etc.
If you are searching for sources on a certain topic, please bear in mind that the archival holdings described in AtoM cannot be seen as being
exhaustive, even if there are several dozen entries available for an archive. Archival descriptions have been produced according to the needs
of the topical Archival Research Guides and not with the aim to provide a comprehensive overview of all sources available in an archive.
Please, generally search independently from the language within the collections. If you are looking for results in certain language, type
keywords in this language (and in the appropriate script, f.ex. cyrillic) into the search box.

Disclaimer
------------

**Archival institutions** have been chosen for description according to the following criteria, according to CENDARIs case studies:

**World War I**

* to have all countries which have participated in the First World War covered
* to give special attention to East European and South East European countries and to describe so-called :menuselection:`hidden archives` which did not dispose of a digital representation so far
* to describe archival institutions with significant holdings with priority to central national archives, national military archives, national war museums
* archives with a wide scope of digitized finding aids

**Medieval Culture**

* to cover most Western countries, including USA and Australia
* to give special attention to East European and South East European countries
* to cover collections of interest for the scientific community according to their relevance in the academic bibliography
* to cover archival institutions with an advanced digitization level

**Descriptions of archival holdings:**
Please bear in mind that the archival holdings described in the CENDARI Archival Directory cannot be seen as being exhaustive, even if
there are several dozen entries available for an archive. Archival descriptions have been produced according to the needs of the topical
Archival Research Guides and not with the aim to provide a comprehensive overview of all sources available in an archive. The selection on
sources depends on the research question and therefore exhaustive descriptions of archival sources can never be reached.
Since descriptions of archival holdings can be added by users registered as contributors, and since they can be made publicly available by
users registered as editors, the Archival Directory can be seen as work in progress, never complete, and depending on the contribution of
users.

Frequently Asked Questions
----------------------------
**Are users allowed to add descriptions and what kind of descriptions are users being allowed to add?**

Users which are not logged in (reseachers) have :menuselection:`view-only` access to the CENDARI Archival Directory. Users are allowed to add archival
descriptions once they have received a DARIAH-account, are authenticated and have been granted contributor's rights, i.e. to read, create,
edit archival descriptions. Users with contributor's rights are not allowed to delete anything or to create archival institutions. Archival
descriptions can be added according to the needs of these users while observing the standards of the International Council on Archives. If
users want to have their archival descriptions being published and thus freely accessible for everybody, they should ask a user with editor
rights (usually their mentor) to check for the quality of the descriptions and afterwards change the status of the archival description from :menuselection:`draft`
to :menuselection:`published`. If users want archival institutions to be created, they should ask their mentor.

**What kind of agreements does CENDARI have with Archives and Libraries regarding the sharing of records?**

CENDARI does not have any specific agreements with Cultural Heritage Institutions. The Archival Directory AtoM will be open for Cultural
Heritage Institutions a	s well as for users to add descriptions according to their needs while observing the standards of the International
Council on Archives. If users want to publish archival descriptions and the content of finding aids within CENDARIs Archival Directory, they
should first talk to the archives whether or not they are allowed to do so.

**Will there be any translating of the institutional and archival descriptions be done?**

Unfortunately, no translations will be provided. Users are kindly requested to generally search independently from the language within the
collections. If you are looking for results in certain language, type keywords in this language (and in the appropriate script, f.ex. cyrillic) into
the search box.

**Will there be a browse by period function?**

Currently, it is foreseen to provide a browse by period function; it will be enabled only later. The reason why it is not yet there is simply that
the majority of archival holdings described have been produced in the same period, i.e. 1914-1918.

**Why do labels provided in the Subjects and Places categories not correspond to all the archival holdings available?**

All the entries have been produced manually. Therefore it depended on the decision of the describing person to add subjects and places
labels where she or he decided this to be appropriate. Therefore, the categories :menuselection:`Subjects` and :menuselection:`Places` correspond not to archival
description, only to a part of the descriptions produced by the MM teams and WW1 historians. In many cases these categories are not filled
at all. If users think these descriptions would be helpful, they can fill in these fields by themselves, where appropriate. This can be done by
entering an archival description after having logged in, click on :menuselection:`edit` at the foot of the page, click on :menuselection:`Access points`, start writing the
appropriate Subject or Place in the field given (note: you have to wait for some one or two seconds after having started typing since the
subjects and places already available in the system show up), and after having chosen or typed manually the appropriate subject or place
click on :menuselection:`Save` at the foot of the page.

**Why is there no comprehensive search tree in a hierarchical order?**

Hierarchised searches need pre-fixed taxonomies, on which the possible users of the Archival Directory should have agreed upon. In a
system like the one provided over here, such a pre-fixed taxonomy cannot be foreseen. Instead, CENDARI chose a more open approach
where users are free to choose their subjects and places according to their needs without having them pre-ordered in a hierarchical tree.
Users can even add subjects and places which have not yet added to the Archival Directory (compare here the FAQ "Why do labels provided
in the Subjects and Places categories ..." on how to do this).

**Why is there no hierarchy in the archival descriptions according to the level of fonds, subfonds, items etc.?**

The software of the Archival Directory does not allow to link fonds, collections, items etc. to each other if they are being produced separately,
i.e. by several contributors. That is why to arrange a comprehensive search tree in a hierarchical order is problematic.
